# N-Loading-Diversity

## Abstract </br>
Though nutrient increases are typically viewed as a benefit for ecosystems, increasing productivity and diversity, excess nutrients – especially nitrogen – can depress diversity eliciting cascades of effects fundamentally changing ecosystem structure. With the continued rise of nitrogen based fertilizers and increasing rates of nitrogen deposition stemming from air pollution, ecosystem management requires a deeper understanding of the impacts that excess nutrients will have on ecosystem diversity. Through a statistical model of a low impact ecosystem in the Pacific Northwest of the United States, latitude, soil nitrogen, soil pH and mean annual temperature were shown to be the strongest drivers of forest diversity in a relatively natural condition forest. As soil nitrogen levels increased, diversity increased demonstrating that low impacted forests behave in a profoundly different way from disturbed ecosystems that decrease diversity with rising nitrogen levels. The model also demonstrated the difference in response trajectories among different genera of plants supporting the theory that ecosystems of different compositions will respond differently to enhanced nutrient loading.
 
## Introduction </br>
	Response to changing nutrient availability is a focal issue in land use change and conservation research. As availability of limiting nutrients increases, competition dynamics and community structure can change dramatically. Research in ecosystem structure change cites a limited understanding of changes in species interactions as a gap in understanding ecosystem structure change (Hulot, 2000). These interactions will change within and between trophic levels. To begin developing this understanding it is essential to understand the changes at the base of the food web, namely autotrophs. Investigating changes in biodiversity at the autotrophic level may provide insights for changes in ecosystem dynamics or diversity at upper trophic levels. 
	Biodiversity is inherently important for ecosystem function and services in all categories regulating, supporting, provisioning, and cultural including crop pollination, water resource protections, and supporting habitats. Many factors drive biodiversity including land use history, disturbance, ecotype, and nutrient availability. Ecosystems are often limited by nutrients such as nitrogen which place a limit on the productivity of the ecosystem. However, there is growing evidence that too much nitrogen can harm ecosystems by reducing diversity. In a 135-year study in Hertfordshire, UK, the addition of nitrogen fertilizer over time decreased species richness (diversity) within grassland plots (Tilman, 2015). Diversity within plots did not recover until nitrogen levels were returned to their original condition. Preliminary data from the Toolik Long-term Ecological Research site in the Arctic has shown similar effects with an excess of nitrogen limiting diversity (McKane, 2002) in the sedge dominated ecosystem. Studies in high latitude forests are consistent with these findings exhibiting a decrease in species richness with increasing soil nitrogen (Strengbom, 2001; Fenn, 1998). As a factor reducing diversity in a range of ecosystems, nitrogen saturation should be carefully considered in ecosystem management. 
	In a meta-analysis of diversity-nutrient studies, Gilliam, proposed three relevant mechanisms for the loss of diversity: (1) “decreases in species richness from loss of relatively numerous N-efficient species; (2) decreases in species evenness from increasing dominance of relatively few high N-requiring species, and (3) declines in forest biodiversity as a result of decreases in both richness and evenness” (Gilliam, 2006). Gilliam’s paper indicates that there are many species that have evolved mechanisms to use nitrogen resources efficiently and that when nitrogen is no longer limiting these species lose their competitive advantage against less nitrogen efficient plants. Nitrogen efficient plants are either plants requiring less nitrogen or nitrogen fixing plants that can convert atmospheric nitrogen into reactive forms available to the plant. Nitrogen efficient plants produce less biomass and so higher nitrogen availability generally leads to greater biomass in the ecosystem (Frey, 2014). Symbiotic N-fixing pants, in which bacteria live in the plant’s root nodules which convert N2 into NH4+, can provide a natural source of nitrogen into soils. These bacterial symbionts contain the enzyme nitrogenase which can break the triple bond in N2, although this process requires substantial energy which is provided to the symbionts from the plants. Since nitrogen fixation is energy intensive, plants do not tend to fix excess nitrogen beyond their individual needs.
	Excess nitrogen is derived from two primary mechanisms: wet/dry deposition of nitrogen and runoff/leaching of unused nitrogen fertilizer. Therefore, it would be expected that soil nitrogen excess is higher near areas with higher fertilizer use or areas that are upwind of intensive reactive nitrogen polluters (which leads to N-deposition downwind). And if that level of soil nitrogen saturated the ecosystem, a corresponding depression in diversity would be expected. 
	This project investigates the role of soil nitrogen, a limited nutrient in some ecosystems, as a driver of ecosystem biodiversity. Ecosystem diversity in response to nutrient levels has implications for management strategies both with respect to maintenance of current ecosystems and restoration of disturbed ecosystems.

### Research Questions </br>
	To what extent does a low nitrogen impacted forest in the US exhibit loss of diversity with increased soil nitrogen? (Are these “natural” forests already in a state of nutrient excess?)
	What drives the percent basal area (BA) of the dominant canopy species (with respect to the relative importance of climate, soil nutrients, and species-specific characteristics)?
	
### Hypotheses </br>
	Anthropogenic impacts on the nitrogen cycle in urbanized and industrialized regions is severe. Even in the lowest impacted areas of the US nitrogen deposition rates have nearly doubled compared to 1860 (pre-industrialization) and fertilizer use is around 0.1-2 kgN/ha (CIESIN, 2016). Therefore a pattern of decreasing diversity is expected with increasing soil nitrogen. This is shown in Figure 1 (adapted from Bobbink, 2010).
	As the percent BA composed on the dominant stand species increases, overall stand diversity and evenness decreases. This is used as a proxy measurement for diversity. Within a region the climate is expected to be fairly consistent, therefore soil nutrients (particularly nitrogen) will have the greatest impact on the percent BA of the dominant species. 

### Study Area </br>
	The study area spans Northern California (37.7844 degrees latitude) through Northern Oregon (45.9477 degrees latitude) is shown in Figure 2. The Pacific Northwest has limited anthropogenic impacts on nitrogen making it an interesting region for investigating the effects of soil nitrogen in a relatively low nitrogen ecosystem. 
	As shown in Figure 3a, the Pacific Northwest is one of few regions of the world in which nitrogen deposition rates are similar to the 1860 level, an indication that there is little nitrogen enrichment from deposition. Figure 3b shows that fertilizer use around the Pacific Northwest is relatively low although still present. This study region has relatively low impact from fertilizer inputs especially since most agricultural zones (and therefore fertilizer use areas) are at lower elevation than the study sites. Overall, the study sites have limited anthropogenic nitrogen additions.

## Materials (Data Set) </br>
	The NACP Terrestrial Ecosystem Research and Regional Analysis -- Pacific Northwest (TERRA-PNW) data set was used for this analysis. The data set contains forest plant traits, biomass, and soil properties analysis from 1999 through 2004 in Oregon and Northern California. A total of 212 1-hectare plots were analyzed for this paper. The forested areas in the Pacific Northwest can be divided into six ecoregions based on geographic and climatic differences: Blue Mountains, Coastal Range, Eastern Cascades, Klamath Mountains, Sierra Nevada Mountains, and the Western Cascades. Within each ecoregion the species composition and climate are comparable making this a possible grouping factor that accounts for some effects of climate and species-specific effects. 

### Response Variable: </br>
	In order to gain a better understanding of factors affecting plant diversity, diversity within each plot was measured through the proxy variable, percent basal area in the dominant species. In the data set the four most prevalent species were identified and the basal area of these species was calculated. The percent of this basal area occupied by the most prevalent species was classified as the percent basal area of the dominant species (% BA). If the % BA is high there is a large difference in the proportion of the plot occupied by the most dominant species and all other species. If the % BA is low then there is little difference is in the proportion of the plot occupied by the most prevalent species and other common species. If one species is making up the majority of the basal area in the plot this is categorized as a “less diverse” plot. Percent BA was measured by identifying the four most prevalent species within the stand. Then the basal area of those four species was calculated and a percentage was assigned to each of the four most prevalent species. This means that 100% basal area accounts for only the basal area of the four most common plants, not the entire basal area of all plants in the plot. See appendix 1 for a list of genera found in the plots. 
	
### Covariates: </br>
	The covariate of particular interest was soil nitrogen as this study aimed to understand how a natural forest responds to changing soil nitrogen levels. Soil nitrogen was measured in grams of nitrogen per meter squared at a depth of 20-50 cm. It includes all nitrogen forms in one measurement after drying through an element analyzer (LECO CNS2000). These forms include NO2-, NO3-, NH4+, and soil organic nitrogen. Nitrogen is only available to plants as ammonium (NH4+) or as nitrate (NO3-). The soil sampling did not distinguish these forms from others. In the study plots soil nitrogen ranged from 8 gN/m2 to 880 gN/m2 with a left skewed distribution indicating the limited samples with high soil nitrogen. Throughout the study this led to wide confidence intervals around estimates made for higher levels of soil nitrogen. 
	Average stand age is measured from the average of the ten oldest trees in the plot. This variable was incorporated into preliminary data analysis since stand age can affect the plant community composition, nutrient dynamics, and diversity. Additionally, investigations in nitrogen mineralization rates indicate that older forests demonstrate slightly elevate mineralization rates compared to early succession forests (Cote, 2000). This would indicate that plants in older forest plots would have elevated access to soil nitrogen since mineralized nitrogen is available to plants. This would make old plots behave as having more soil nitrogen. The average stand age ranged from 8 to 795 years with the mean at 118.3 years.  
	Soil pH was measured using the ratio of soil mass to water. Soil pH can be affected by many factors including rainfall, decomposition of organic material, and soil type. Generally, lower pH (more acidic soil) dissolve more soil nutrients making them available to plants and therefore promoting growth. However, different species also have different optimal pH levels for growth which typically range from 4-8. Soil pH is also postulated to affect the rate of ecosystem nutrient cycling, especially nitrogen and carbon. Different steps in the nitrogen cycle exhibit different sensitivities to pH with organic matter mineralization showing negligible rate change effects with pH but nitrification accelerating greatly with lower pH (Kemmitt, 2006). As a result, lower pH sites would be expected to support higher diversity because the faster cycling of nutrients would decrease competition among species. The pH across the study plots ranged from 3.87 to 7.20.
Mean annual temperature is averaged across the years 1984-2013 and is measured in degrees Celsius. Temperature is included in the model because it can impact diversity (Rohde, 1992) and nitrogen soil dynamics (Lavoie, 2011). Generally higher temperatures are expected to be associated with greater diversity mimicking the latitudinal trend seen from the tropics to the arctic. Across the study site mean annual temperature ranged from 2.4°C to 13.5°C with the mean at 8.2°C. 

### Grouping factors: </br>
	Grouping factors were also considered in this study to account for variation due to group level effects. The first grouping factor, ecoregion, is a defined geographic area with similar ecological and climatic properties. Six ecoregions were included in this project as shown in Table 1. 
Some ecoregions may be more or less prone to plot dominance by a single species which was controlled for by including it as a random effect or grouping factor. Dominance within a stand can also be affected by individual plant physiology. To be considered the dominant species in this analysis, the plant must have the largest basal area of any of the four most prevalent plants in the plot. This was used as a grouping factor to control for differences in plant physiology that would affect the likelihood of a plant becoming a dominant species. Finally, the plot number was used as a grouping factor to control for possible differences among individual plots not accounted for in either genus properties or ecoregion properties.
	Nitrogen fixer status was also considered within the grouping factors since nitrogen fixation is another important pathway for raising the level of soil nitrogen that could be confounding the impacts of anthropogenicly introduced soil nitrogen. However, the number of nitrogen fixing species within the plots were low (about 4.6% of cataloged plants) and nitrogen fixers primarily occurred in the Western Cascades ecoregion. As shown in Figure 4, there was no difference in the percent BA in the dominant species whether there were nitrogen fixers in the region or not. While the Coastal Range and Eastern Cascades show the percent basal area associated with the nitrogen fixing tree at the extreme end of the range the sample size is one plant which cannot be used to draw any conclusions. As a result of this preliminary analysis, nitrogen fixer status was determined to be insignificant to the overall plot diversity effects.

### Methods (Model Development) </br>
	Statistical modeling of nutrient effects on ecosystems is an important method for describing process of global change, evaluating the current understanding of these processes, and making predictions for future land management. Mixed effects modeling was used the account for diversity differences as a factor of climatic, soil quality, and species specific covariates as well as random grouping effects. The response variable (% basal area composed by dominant species) is lognormally distributed so the mixed model used a long-transformed response variable in a linear mixed effect model. 
	The covariates were distributed as gamma or normal distributions as shown in Figure 5. Mixed effect modeling is particularly powerful for examining nutrient effects since specific grouping effects (often called random effects) can be accounted for separating variance from inherent differences among plots or species within the plots and specific nutrient effects. 
	Initial data exploration demonstrated a relationship between soil nitrogen and percent BA when plots were broken down by dominant species genus and ecoregion. Figure 6 shows that different genera display different dominance responses to changing soil nitrogen and that the relationship depends on the ecoregion of plot. This indicates that both climatic factors (encompassed in the different ecoregions) and different plant physiologies (encompassed in the different genera) impacted a stand’s response to changing nitrogen levels. These characteristics were included during variable selection.
	Variable selection was conducted to reduce the number of covariates (therefore minimizing the degrees of freedom and maximizing the model’s power) based on autocorrelation among variables, coefficient effects in generalized linear models, and biological justification. Correlation among covariates is shown in Figure 7.
	Soil pH was highly correlated with both mean annual precipitation and soil carbon resulting in the removal of precipitation and carbon from the model. pH has important effects on nutrient solubility and therefore availability to plants rendering it a critical factor to incorporate into the model. Longitude was highly correlated with soil nitrogen and mean annual temperature so it was removed from the model. After removing covariates with high correlation, general linear models were developed to test coefficient effect of the remaining covariates as shown in Figure 8.
	In the coefficient plot, factors whose 95% credible interval does not cross the 0 line are significant. The four most significant variables were: latitude, mean annual temperature, soil nitrogen, and soil pH. Models were further tested dropping one covariate at a time to evaluate the impact of removing any one of these covariates. The results of the drop one test are shown in Table 2 and indicate that, although the strength of impact varies, all four factors are important to the overall model. These factors were carried forward into the mixed model development.
	Mixed models were subsequently developed with the covariates selected through variable selection included as fixed effects and random effects applied through grouping factors. The models were optimized using restricted maximum likelihood because the structure of the fixed effects did not vary among the models rather the random effects (grouping factors) were manipulated. Grouping factors considered were: plot number, ecoregion, and genus. Due to low counts in many species, plants were aggregated at the genus level to reduce effects of small sample sizes. Models with plot number and ecoregion performed poorly compared with those incorporating genus as a random effect. Though when combined, genus and ecoregion together produced a good fit. Ultimately the three models performing highest in terms of AIC, DIC, deviance were those using genus as a random effect (either as intercept, slope and intercept, or intercept along with ecoregion). Model selection is described further in the model evaluation section.

### Bayesian Framework: </br>
	These models were developed in a Bayesian framework indicating that the posterior, likelihood, and prior were all distributions which facilitated a full incorporation of uncertainty into the model. Using a Bayesian framework also incorporates prior information which can increase the value of the posterior distribution. Bayesian frameworks consider parameters as random variables that update prior knowledge. The marginal distribution was computed using a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm with 50,000 iterations and 1,000 iterations removed as burn-in. The MCMC algorithm used a Metropolis-Hastings update criterion. Uninformative priors were used as there was not existing data relevant to incorporate as prior information. With a fairly large sample size (212 plots), the likelihood distribution dominates over the priors weighting the new information more heavily than the uninformative prior starting position. The posterior distribution can be written as: 
	posterior distribution ∝ likelihood*priors	(1)
	[θ│y]  ∝ [y│θ_1,θ_2,θ_3,θ_4 ][θ_1 ][θ_2 ][θ_3 ][θ_4]	(2)

This indicates that the probability of the parameters given the data is proportional to the probability of the data given the parameters times the prior distributions of the parameters. In these models there are four parameters for the coefficient of each covariate. The posterior distribution is found using the MCMC algorithm and an example distribution for soil nitrogen and soil pH are shown in Figure 9.
	The mixed effect models (with both fixed and random effects) were incorporated into the Bayesian framework. The trace plots in Figure 10 were used for visual inspection of model convergence. All trace plots demonstrate good convergence in the MCMC chains for each parameter and show the posterior distributions for each parameter. The parameters shown in Figure 10 have been z-transformed for standardization. 
Methods (Model Evaluation)
	Various models were developed using the covariates found during variable selection and a range of random effects. The random effects including grouping factors of plot number, genus, and ecoregion applied as slope, intercept, or both in different combinations. Based on Figure 6 both genus and ecoregion has an impact on the shape of the relationship between soil nitrogen and diversity. The three top performing models (which performed similarly under several model selection criteria) are presented here. Deviance is a measure of model fit which is useful for model evaluation. The lower the deviance, the better the fit between the model and data. However, complexity must also be considered since a good fit with too much complexity is meaningless (Spiegelhalter, 2002). Tradeoffs between these two capacities is quantified using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). AIC values are presented in Table 3 for model comparison.
Table 3 shows the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) for each of the models based on grouping factors. The ICC is a metric that measures the ratio of variance within the class compared to total variance. When ecoregion is used as a grouping factor the ICC is zero which indicates there is no statistical need to use this grouping factor. However, there is biological justification for including the ecoregion as a random effect since plant diversity is closely linked to climate variables which change across ecoregions. The AIC values are also shown in Table 3 with lower AIC generally indicating a better model in terms of fit penalized for parameters. The first model (genus as intercept) has the lowest AIC at 17.857, however, an AIC of 4-6 is generally required to demonstrate a meaningful difference between models and difference of 10 to be sure the models are different. Here the models perform similarly based on AIC and so are all included as the best models.
	Model assumptions were also tested including the normality of variance, homogeneity of variance, and independence of data. Linear mixed effects models assume that residuals are normally distributed. This was verified by visual inspection of the Q-Q plot shown in Figure 11. 
Residuals adhering to this assumption fall directly on the Q-Q line which is demonstrated in the figure. Furthermore, linear mixed effect models assume that the variance is distributed approximately homogeneously among groups. This was verified by visual examination of Pearson fitted values versus residuals. The variances were approximately homogenous indicating that the linear mixed effect model can be appropriately applied to this data.
	The fit between predicted data and observed data was examined using both conditional R2 and marginal R2. Conditional R2, shown in equation 4, describes the variance from both random and fixed effects while the marginal R2, shown in equation 3, describes the variance explained by fixed effects alone.
	Marginal R^2=(σ_f^2)/(σ_f^2+∑_(l=1)^u▒〖σ_r^2+σ_residual^2 〗)	(3)

	Conditional R^2=(σ_f^2+∑_(l=1)^u▒σ_r^2 )/(σ_f^2+∑_(l=1)^u▒〖σ_r^2+σ_residual^2 〗)	(4)

The marginal and conditional R2 values for each model are shown in Table 4.
While the conditional R2 values are greater than the marginal R2s for each of the models, the majority of the variance is explained by the fixed effects indicating that the grouping factors had a relatively limited impact on the relationship between soil nitrogen and diversity. Instead, the fixed effects (latitude, temperature, soil nitrogen, and soil pH) are dominating the model. The three models are comparable in terms of R2 further supporting the argument that model selection is not appropriate among these three candidate models. 

## Results </br>
	All three models selected under model evaluation demonstrate similar relationships between covariates and percent BA. Latitude has a strong positive effect on percent BA, temperature and soil pH have a moderate positive effect on percent BA, and soil nitrogen has a negative effect on percent BA. These trends are visualized in Figure 12. 
This indicates that as latitude, temperature, and soil pH increase, the percent BA in the dominant species also increases indicating a decrease in diversity. The trends in latitude and temperature align with results of previous studies indicating that diversity is lower at high latitudes and cold temperatures (Rohde, 1992). 
The coefficient plots in Figure 13 indicate the strength of effects from different covariates in each of the three best models. All four covariates are significant coefficients (the 95% confidence interval shown in the thin line does not cross zero). Latitude has the strongest coefficient effect size indicating that it was the primary driver of the pattern in percent BA dominance. The differences among the models are slight and no visible difference is seen among the three coefficient plots. However, the magnitude of the coefficient is not an indication of the coefficient effect. The final model equations are shown in equations 5, 6, and 7 where the largest magnitude coefficient is nitrogen, although Figure 13 clearly shows that latitude is the most significant driver of percent BA.
	%BA=62.49+46.70*L+10.61*T-357.65*N+6.73*pH+ϵ_i
ϵ_(i )~ N(0,1.07)
(5)

	%BA=62.49+46.70*L+10.61*T-(385.12+R_i)*N+6.73*pH+ϵ_i
ϵ_i  ~ N(0,1.06)
R_i  ~ N(0,1.01)
(6)

	%BA=62.49+46.70*L+10.61*T-357.65*N+6.73*pH+ϵ_i
ϵ_i  ~ N(0,1.07)
(7)

 The parameter estimates are shown in Table 5. These results are visualized with the random intercepts and slopes for the respective random effects.
In Figure 14 panel c, the intercept is assigned based on ecoregion. The green line shows the Eastern Cascades region with the greatest intercept indicating that for a given level of soil nitrogen the corresponding percent BA is the largest (or least diverse). This could correspond to the high level of Alnus or Alder trees in those plots which are typically drier plots with larger temperature fluctuations in the rain shadow of the Cascade Mountains. The abundance of shrubs is much greater than trees which might result in Alnus forming a larger percentage of tree/shrub basal area measured. The lowest ecoregion intercept corresponds to the Klamath Mountains, an ecoregion spanning a relatively long latitudinal gradient that encompasses both temperate rainforest and coniferous forest. These gradients align with the observation that the percent BA is generally lower than other ecoregions (therefore the diversity is higher).
	In terms of slopes and intercepts observed in panels a and b, the genus corresponding the largest percent BA (lowest diversity) was Pseudotsuga while the other extreme (highest diversity) was characterized by Tsuga. Both of these genera had large sample sizes and therefore the effects are likely representative of forest processes. Pseudotsuga is in the Pinacea family and includes species such as the Douglas Fir and Oregon Pine. This is a fast growing genus and was generally found in younger plots. It is likely that the fast growing Pseudotsuga dominated the stands in these plots due to their fast growth and reduced the diversity. Tsuga is also in the Pinacea family and includes Hemlock trees. These trees require high rainfall and relatively cool temperatures. Due to these physiological constraints, Tsuga primarily appeared in plots with lower mean annual temperature which was highly correlated with high diversity (see Figure 6). The trend in slope by genus mirrored that of the intercepts with Pseudotsuga increasing percent BA fastest as soil nitrogen increased and Tsuga decreasing percent BA as soil nitrogen increased. Additionally, Tsuga was the dominant species in most of the oldest plots (550 years and above). Species diversity tends to increase with forest age until a maximum is achieved and subsequently diversity declines. It is likely that the older plots that include Tsuga.

## Discussion </br>
	Species diversity within forests is the result of several factors acting in concert. As the soil nitrogen in the plots increased, the diversity in the plots increased (seen as an increased in the percent BA by the dominant species). This trend is opposite to the pattern expected for this region and shown in previous studies such as the grasslands fertilization experiment. This is likely because the forest region analyzed is relatively “natural” with low anthropogenic nitrogen inputs. The ecosystem is limited in nitrogen and therefore areas with additional nitrogen demonstrate more diverse growth. As shown in the results section, latitude and soil pH were the most significant drivers of percent BA in the dominant species. Continuing use of nitrogen-based fertilizer and emission of nitrogen pollutants will continue to raise the level of excess soil nitrogen which depresses diversity within plots. Although other covariates were shown to be more important than soil nitrogen, soil nitrogen had a significant effect which will in turn have significant effects on forest diversity. 
	The relative effects of coefficients compared to grouping factors is shown by comparing the variance explained by each part of the model. Table 4 shows the relative percentages explained by each part of the model. Since the fixed effects dominated the results, it can be concluded that the fixed effects were are more important driver of diversity trends. In particular, latitude was the primary driver of diversity explaining roughly 55% of the variance accounted for in random effects. Temperature explained around 7% of the variance, soil nitrogen around 10%, and soil pH explained 30% of the variance. This indicates that climate factors had a much stronger impact on diversity trends than soil nutrients. Within the soil properties, pH dominate the impacts over soil nitrogen. Although soil nitrogen was not a top contributor to diversity trends in this data set, it was still a significant covariate and therefore important to consider in forest management. Although wide scale trends may not be driven by soil nutrients, changes in these nutrient levels will still have perceptible ecosystem impacts. 
	Several of the covariates explored during variable selection did not result in significant trends. Most surprising was that stand age did not affect the percent BA in the dominant species. One possible explanation for this is that the increased mineralization in the older soils was encapsulated by the soil nitrogen measurement and the additional nitrogen available to plants was accounted for through those measurements.
Implications for future work
	Though these models elucidate an interesting interaction among diversity, climate, and soil nutrient availability, further work needs to be conducted to refine the model and parameter estimates. The data used in this analysis was not collected specifically for this model and estimates would be improved by altering that data collection procedures. Firstly, percent basal area within the four most dominant species is likely not an accurate measurement of diversity. Rather, species richness or the Shannon diversity index would give a more accurate quantification of plot diversity. In order to use the diversity measures, every plant in the plot should be identified and recorded.
	Furthermore, the soil nitrogen measured in this data set included total soil nitrogen which incorporates both organic and inorganic forms. Plants can access inorganic nitrogen stores but not organic nitrogen stores. Subsequently, total nitrogen is not an indication of nutrient limitation to the plants. By resolving these different soil nitrogen pools more specifically, the impact of changing nitrogen availability to plants could be specifically examined.
	Changing soil nitrogen does not only affect plants, but also soil microbial communities such as fungi and bacteria associated with plants for free living in the soil. Future work should investigate net diversity change of the entire ecosystem accounting for possible increases in soil microbial communities that might balance the negative effects of additional nutrients on plant diversity.
	Before informing policy or management decisions with this model, further work also needs to be done investigating the critical point at which ecosystems switch from being nitrogen limited (increasing nitrogen increases diversity) and having excess nitrogen (increasing nitrogen decreases diversity). From an ecosystem ecology perspective these two different regimes require vastly different management strategies and indicate very different nutrient cycling dynamics. Along a longitudinal gradient from the Pacific Northwest to the Midwest of the United States, forests shift from more natural forests with low nitrogen deposition and fertilizer input to areas of high nitrogen deposition and high nutrient input. Taking measurements along this gradient would further resolve the critical point and inform whether the same covariates drive diversity trends in nitrogen excess ecosystems.
 
## References </br>
Bobbink, R., Hicks, K., Galloway, J., Spranger, T., Alkemade, R., Ashmore, M., … De Vries, W. (2010). Global assessment of nitrogen deposition effects on terrestrial plant diversity: A synthesis. Ecological Applications, 20(1), 30–59. http://doi.org/10.1890/08-1140.1
Center for International Earth Science Information Network - CIESIN - Columbia University, United Nations Food and Agriculture Programme - FAO, and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical - CIAT. 2005. Gridded Population of 	the World, Version 3 (GPWv3): Population Count Grid. Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications 	Center (SEDAC). http://dx.doi.org/10.7927/H4639MPP. Accessed 30 November 2016
Côté, L., Brown, S., Paré, D., Fyles, J., & Bauhus, J. (2000). Dynamics of carbon and nitrogen mineralization in relation to stand type, stand age and soil texture in the boreal mixedwood. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 32(8–9), 1079–1090. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0038-0717(00)00017-1
Fenn, M. E., Poth, M. A., Aber, J. D., Baron, J. S., Bormann, B. T., Johnson, D. W., … Stottlemyer, R. (2016). Nitrogen Excess in North American Ecosystems : Predisposing Factors , Ecosystem Responses , and Management Strategies. Ecological Applications, 8(3), 706–733.
Frey, S. D., Ollinger, S., Nadelhoffer, K., Bowden, R., Brzostek, E., Burton, A., … Wickings, K. (2014). Chronic nitrogen additions suppress decomposition and sequester soil carbon in temperate forests. Biogeochemistry, 121(2), 305–316. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10533-014-0004-0
Gilliam, F. S. (2006). Response of the herbaceous layer of forest ecosystems to excess nitrogen deposition. Journal of Ecology, 94(6), 1176–1191. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2745.2006.01155.x
Hulot, F. D., Lacroix, G., Lescher-Moutoué, F., & Loreau, M. (2000). Functional diversity governs ecosystem response to nutrient enrichment. Nature, 405(6784), 340–4. http://doi.org/10.1038/35012591
Kemmitt, S. J., Wright, D., Goulding, K. W. T., & Jones, D. L. (2006). pH regulation of carbon and nitrogen dynamics in two agricultural soils. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 38(5), 898–911. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2005.08.006
Lavoie, M., Mack, M. C., & Schuur, E. A. G. (2011). Effects of elevated nitrogen and temperature on carbon and nitrogen dynamics in Alaskan arctic and boreal soils. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences, 116(3), 1–14. http://doi.org/10.1029/2010JG001629
McKane, R. B., Johnson, L. C., Shaver, G. R., Nadelhoffer, K. J., Rastetter, E. B., Fry, B., … Murray, G. (2002). Resource-based niches provide a basis for plant species diversity and dominance in arctic tundra. Nature, 415(6867), 68–71. http://doi.org/10.1038/415068a
Rohde, K. (1992). Latitudinal Gradients in Species Diversity : The Search for the Primary Cause. Oikos, 65(3), 514–527.
Spiegelhalter, D. J., Best, N. G., Carlin, B. P., & van der Linde, A. (2002). Bayesian Measures of Model Complexity and Fit. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B (Statistical Methodology), 64(4), 583–639. http://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9868.00353
Strengbom, J., Nordin, A., Näsholm, T., & Ericson, L. (2001). Slow recovery of boreal forest ecosystem following decreased nitrogen input. Functional Ecology, 15(4), 451–457. http://doi.org/10.1046/j.0269-8463.2001.00538.x
Tilman, D; Isbell, F. (2015). Recovery as nitrogen declines. Nature, 528, 336–337.
